Now imagine you are interpreting the rhythm of an ECG
We are struggling to identify discrete p-wave
Perhaps you can't make out any p-waves and perhaps the RR interval
Is it regular
If you're thinking the certainly doesn't look like normal sinus rhythm then you may be looking at atrial fibrillation
Afib is caused by abnormal chaotic impulse
Caused by multiple wandering reentrant circuit
Often originating where the
The pulmonary veins enter the left atrium
It is seen more often patient
The right or left atrial enlargement
These abnormal impulses can cause the atrial rate
Tourist 350 to 600 beats per minute
The atrial impulses are so rapid and disorganized
That there are no identifiable p waves
Here's where the life-saving gatekeeper function of the AV node comes into play
If all the atrial impulses at a rate of 600
Or transmitted through the ventricle
Then the ventricles would contract so frequently
But they would not have time to fill
Stroke volume would plummet causing a drop in cardiac output in cardiogenic shock
Luckily the AV node has a refractory period And it blocks many of the atrial impulse
Buses from reaching the bench
Despite the AV nodes
Life-saving gatekeeper function
The ventricular rate can still be dangerously High
And this arrhythmia is referred to as A-fib with rvr which stands for Rapid ventricular response
The AV node left atrial impulses through in a seemingly random pattern
Which causes the QRS complex
Sis to be irregularly spaced
The distance between QRS complex is called the RR interval
Varies from B2B
This is why afib is called irregularly irregular
The Irregular appearance can be more helpful for recognizing AFib
The abnormal p waves
This is a great example of the irregularly irregular rhythm
Look at how Randomness pasties QRS complexes are
A long pause here and then a cluster of fast beats and then another long pause
Disregard you towards 8
And the lack of identifiable p waves confirms it
I count 19 QRS complexes
In the 10-second Rhythm strip
Which corresponds to 114 beats per minute
So this is afib with rvr
Afib with rvr may be asymptomatic
But it can cause symptoms such as palpitations
Lightheadedness
Dyspnea
Chest pain and fatigue
Also when the Atria aren't contraction normally then you risk blood stasis within the Atria
Especially the left atrial appendage
As you know blood stasis is one of the components of virchow's Triad there's a risk factor for thrombus for me
So patients with persistent AFib
Are at risk of formula clotting Atria
Which can dislodge an emboli
This is a common cause of stroke
So the treatment of afib should include three considerations
Rhythm control
Ray control
And clot prevention
Rhythm control means cardioversion
To restore sinus rhythm
Cardioversion can either be performed chemically with class 1 A1C or 3 anti-arrhythmic drugs
Or electrically using the paddles
Is crucial to assess for thrombus in the Atria before cardioversion
If the patient converts back to sinus rhythm and their Atria start Contracting in a coordinated manner
They may squeeze the clot out of the Atria and precipitate a stroke
Therefore prior to cardioversion you should perform a transesophageal echocardiogram
RTE
To look for a clock
If there is no clotting Atria
The new safety card over
If there is a clot then the patient may need blood thinners to resolve the clock
And then a repeat te to ensure that the cloud is gone before you attempt
Sicario
If a patient is hemodynamically unstable dude AFib
Electrical cardioversion may be emergently needed
Rate control means slowing down the ventricular rate to improve ventricular filling time and cardiac output
Beta blockers and non dihydropyridine calcium channel blockers are great at increasing refractory period of the AV node
This decreases the number of atrial impulses that are conducted through the ventricles which decreases the ventricular rate
Atrial impulses will continue to be chaotic and disorganized
But as long as the ventricles are strong and rate controlled
The cardiac output should be normal
Chronic afib often requires anticoagulant
Such as warfarin dabigatran rivaroxaban or apixaban
Prevent thromboembolism
However blood thinners can be quite dangerous
The patient hits their head while on blood thinners they might have a fatal intracranial bleed from a minor trauma
Does the risks and benefits must always be considered
An elderly patient with frequent Falls may be better off without blood thinners despite the stroke risk
The Chad's vasc score
Is used to assess a patient's risk factors
For thromboembolism to determine the need for anticoagulation
The medication digoxin is an inotrope that increases cardiac contractility
It has dangerous side effects
And can build up to toxic levels
So it's uses falling out of fashion
However digoxin also works to increase the refractory period of the AV node
So it is useful for ventricular rate control
So patients who have both CHF and AFib
May benefit from both the
Drake control properties
And it's on atrophic effects
Lastly certain patients benefit from percutaneous catheter ablation
Which is intended to be a permanent cure
Cardiac mapping is used to locate the area from which the abnormal impulses originating
A catheter is inserted into a blood vessel and threaded Into the Heart
Radiofrequency or Crowell thermal energy are used to destroy the problem area
Because if it was caused by wondering reaction circuits
Ablation for afib is not always effective
Initial success rates were reportedly around 70%
You might think it makes the most sense to cardiovert all of your patience and give him a shot at maintaining sinus rhythm and maybe even eventually
Get them off blood thinners
However even if cardioversion successfully restore sinus rhythm
This is not a permanent solution
As many patients revert back to 8
They may require chronic antiarrhythmics to stay in sinus rhythm
These medications have serious and potentially lethal side effects
The Chronic you should be avoided
You may be wondering which of the treatment options is best
The affirm trial study this and show that there was no survival benefit for rhythm control over rate control
And that Rhythm control is associated with more complications
So rate control and anticoagulation are the Mainstays of treatment
With ablation as a Curative option
Atrial fibrillation is often contraste
With atrial flutter and some patients switch from one to the other
Those are abnormal atrial impulses that can cause tachycardia
Depending on the AV node gatekeeper ability
A flutter is caused by an anatomically fixed re-entrant circuit
Often along the tricuspid valve annulus of the right atrium
Well the p waves are not discernible an A-fib a flutter shows characteristic Sawtooth P wave
In a flutter
The atrial rate is usually 180 to 350 beats per minute
Just not quite as rapid AFib
Also atrial flutter is more regular and the conduction from the Atria to ventricles
Is a fixed proportion
For example a flutter may show an atrial rate of 300 and a ventricular rate of 150
This is called a flutter with 2 to 1 conduction
Which means that every other atrial impulse is transmitted through the bench
For some reason a flutter tends to occur with the rates
Factors of 300
So if you see an atrial arrhythmia with an atrial rate of 150 and the reticular rate of 75 you should be suspicious for a flutter
This ECG shows the obvious Sawtooth p waves of a flutter
Similar to AFib patients can be asymptomatic if the ventricular rate is within normal limits
Rapid a flutter can cause palpitations or dyspnea
A flutter can also predispose page
Directions to thromboemboli
Treatments include electrical cardioversion or catheter ablation which is considered Curative
Medical treatment
Includes rate control with beta blockers or calcium channel blocker
Anticoagulation for a flutter still being investigated but you're probably be treated similarly to AFib
Catheter ablation is very effective
It disrupting the anatomically fixed reentry
Circuit of a flutter
Ablation is much more effective
For a flutter than for AFib
What success rate sighted around 97%